Good afternoon.
Thanks for joining us this afternoon.
I'm Brett Halle.
I'm the director of
Pro Video Engineering.
Today we're going to spend a
few minutes and talk about how
to interface professional video
hardware to Final Cut Pro 4.0.
One of the big challenges in the
video production space is how to
actually get all that data into
the computer in an effective way,
whether it be video and audio
and all the various pieces.
And then when you're
dealing with that much data,
be it standard definition
or high definition,
how do you manipulate it and
manage it and then display it and
do things like effects in a very
highly efficient and quick way?
To talk about how that is done and
how you can produce products that
can work with Final Cut Pro 4.0,
I'd like to invite Ken Carson,
the Final Cut Pro engineering lead,
to talk about this.
Good afternoon.
We've just released
Final Cut 4.0 a couple weeks ago.
It came out.
We introduced it at NAB this year.
And with that,
we've really shown our commitment to
the high-end space for video production,
a whole suite of tools.
And today,
we're here talking about how we can
interface hardware with our application
and what you can do to help us produce
even better tools for the industry.
So we'll be covering a
number of topics here.
There's a good number of you in
the audience who know more about
this than I do at this point,
having developed a number
of products for us.
Then there's a bunch of
you probably new to this,
and I'll be trying to split the
difference between those of you
who know it all and those of you
who don't know much about it.
So we'll be describing two kinds of
video hardware that works with Final Cut.
Those that just do the
input and the output,
as opposed to those that do a lot
of effects processing on board,
beyond what the host computer could do.
We'll be talking about RT Extreme,
which is our new software
model for effects processing.
And we'll be talking about
the AV playback architecture,
which is all built around QuickTime.
As an extension to that,
we then use an enabler file,
the RT-Enabler, to let Final Cut know
about the capabilities.
We'll cover that and talk
about the opportunities for the
developers with our products.
Following that,
I'll have Gio come up and talk about
the uncompressed codecs that we've
developed and released with this version,
and the Pro I/O protocol and
driver set that we've developed.
So with Final Cut Pro 4.0,
actually all versions
of Final Cut really,
it's built on QuickTime.
That provides a lot of
flexibility for how it works,
what kind of hardware
can be attached to it,
as opposed to everything coming
from us and you get what we provide.
You can handle with through
QuickTime a wide range of resolutions.
We can handle, for example, 320,
240 JPEG, all the way up to HD online
using hardware solutions.
Software versions, so you buy a computer,
Final Cut Pro,
that alone is enough to let you
work with software versions.
For example, the offline RT, the DV,
and FireWire out for DV.
Adding on hardware gives you the
ability to perform SD and HD,
and that can either be the
I/O or accelerated versions.
So a little history on how the effects
have come about within Final Cut.
Final Cut 1 came out
in the spring of '99,
and the ability to do real-time effects
was a real obvious missing piece there.
So version 2 took us a
little while to get there.
We released the first version
with Final Cut with real-time
effects based on QuickTime.
In that model,
we were using hardware acceleration
to perform all the effects.
Later that year, we released Final Cut 3,
which introduced the
G4 real-time effects.
For that, we took the model that we had,
developed for hardware with QuickTime,
and applied a software
engine underneath it,
replacing the hardware that
would have done the decompression
and the effects with software,
so that you don't need to add
any additional hardware just
to do the simple effects.
And this spring,
we introduced Final Cut Pro 4.0
with the RT Extreme model,
which really enhances what
we can do in software.
We are now handling full-frame images,
different resolutions,
a lot more effects,
and expanded to be able to use the
video out from our software effects.
In version 3, there was no monitoring
on external devices.
And we've also extended the number
of effects that are available for
the hardware developers as well.
So, to go back through the two different
kinds of the video hardware,
this is a really big distinction.
You can build a board that has a lot
of processing power built into it and
perform the effects in the hardware.
And if you go with a system like that,
you can provide a lot of capabilities,
just not possible in the base CPU.
On the other hand,
you can also build a system that
just provides the video I/O.
If you take just the
computer and the software,
The computers come with FireWire,
so if you're working with DV,
you're all set.
But if you're trying to work in
standard definition or HD video,
there is no plug on the back of a
Macintosh that lets you connect direct
to your video monitors or tape decks.
So you have to have a piece
of hardware in between there.
That hardware can be as simple
as just doing the conversion from
the uncompressed video to the
analog and digital video worlds.
I'm going to go through some of what's
new in RT-Effects with RT-Extreme.
One of the things that we've got in
there that's with the new effects,
all of the effects scripts are
now capable of being real-time,
with the exception of those that
read particular frames back.
That's a very small set of them.
The effects scripts is the
scripting language that all of
our effects have been written in.
If you're familiar with the program,
the effects builder tool is
built into the application.
You can see all of these
scripts are written.
Another aspect of the new effects in
version 4 is the variable speed effect.
So this lets you do keyframe speed,
real-time speed, and variable rate speed.
We've taken advantage of OpenGL to do
a number of our effects processing.
For those of you who've been
catching some of the OpenGL sessions,
you can see that there's a lot of
capability out there in the GPU,
and we're taking advantage of that now.
We added beyond version 3,
in version 3 we had just offline
RT and DV as our file formats
that were supported for real-time.
In version 4,
we've added uncompressed formats as well.
At this point,
we are only enabling those when
you connect a hardware board to
them since there is no I/O directly
available for the uncompressed formats.
Internally, the video processing that we
do is generally YUV-based.
In this version,
we've optimized it so that we're
using a combination of 422 processing
and 4444 processing based on
the effects being performed to
get you the best performance.
Another feature that's been added is
real-time 3-2 pull-down insertion.
So with cinema tools bundled in
the application and the advent of
these new cameras that are shooting,
like the Panasonic DVX-100 that puts
24-fps data onto a TV NTSC tape,
we can capture that,
get the 24-fps data out of that,
do true 24-fps editing and playback
reinserting the 3-2 pull-downs that you
can display it out to an NTSC device.
So I'm going to come over and demo a few
things and highlight what's unique in
this version that the hardware developers
are going to need to know how to get to.
So I've got a sequence here.
You can see the various
tracks and video and audio.
I'll just play through it once
and then describe a few things
that are going on in here.
So you can see that the effects
are being performed here.
None of this is rendered.
Now, first off,
over here in the RT pop-up,
we've got a number of settings.
This being DV, we've enabled a choice of
quality to perform for playback.
If I switch up to high quality,
we'll see that more of the things in
the timeline will not be real-time.
So if you look at the colors over here,
this section being red indicates
that it doesn't think it's real-time.
This green, it thinks,
is if I switch to high quality,
this other clip is now beyond what we can
guarantee will be real-time and software.
But we've also added another
feature called Unlimited RT.
Now this removes the time constraints
that we have in here for figuring out
what's possible on a particular machine.
And in general,
we have to be pretty conservative
with those estimates because
Different machines,
you have different kinds of disk systems.
If you have short clips,
it's possible to play through
something that's more complicated,
but if you try extending that clip,
it won't work.
So in the normal model that we use,
we are pretty conservative about it.
And if I play through this section where
we've got multiple clips layered on top,
you can see that even in full frame,
it is real-time.
And we weren't dropping any frames.
So I want to highlight the different
render bar colors that we've got up here.
A change from version 3.
Over here in the left,
we've got this section with
the cross-dissolve that's
being performed in real time.
Now that I'm in full resolution,
that's coming out in a kind
of grayish-green color,
because this is full quality.
There's no advantage to rendering this.
If I switch back to the
medium quality mode,
you'll see it as bright green,
which is what we used to use
for the real-time effects.
Over here, this section,
now that I'm in unlimited RT,
this shows up as orange to show
you that it's beyond what we think
is really going to work correctly,
but we'll let you do it.
And this section over here is yellow.
This is a proxy effect.
So a proxy effect,
as I'm scrubbing through it,
you can see this has a soft edge on it,
but we're not able to perform
that part in real time,
so we're showing it in yellow.
And as it plays, you see it's being
performed with a hard edge.
And one of the things that we've
got in this version is the ability
to work with multiple codecs
that handle the same formats.
So over here in the system
settings under effects handling,
we've got on the left side a list
of all of the formats that have
enabler entries saying that they
can be real-time in some form.
And then over on the right
there's a pop-up that lists the
different manufacturers who are
providing drivers for that format.
So this is an NTSC DV sequence,
so we're using the Final Cut Pro codecs.
And I added an enabler that would list a
couple of others here so that if I choose
Another codec or choose
none and come back here.
We're going to see that the
timeline changes from all those
being real-time to being read
requiring rendering because nothing
is going to perform those effects.
This was a problem in particular
previously with DV where a couple
of different vendors had DV drivers
and we would disable our DV if
we found one of them installed.
And they needed external control
panels to turn on and off their
versions in order to turn ours on.
And I'm expecting that with version 4,
a lot of people are going to be
providing uncompressed solutions that
are going to be overlapping down here.
And this will let people within
the application switch who's
going to be running the effects.
One other thing that I wanted to
highlight over here as a new feature
is the floating point rendering.
Now we don't do floating
point processing in real time,
but the option is over here in the
video processing tab to choose to use
the floating point rendering engine.
If you
For 10-bit uncompressed video,
you'll want to do this as a way
to preserve the image quality.
Otherwise,
you'll be going through 8-bit paths.
Alright, so let's go back to the slides.
So one of the important things to
remember about ArcGIS Xtreme and
using software effects is that,
um,
They'll just keep getting better.
In fact, what we've got here, you know,
this is a dual G4 1.42 gig machine.
But you can imagine that with what's
been introduced here at the show,
with the G5 and with the
software improvements in Panther,
that the capabilities of the
system will just keep improving.
On the hardware side,
all the things we've been
adding for the software effects
really translate as well.
So, for example,
the variable speed effects are
available for the hardware.
And in addition,
the ability to mix formats in
a sequence that we've added,
which can be enabled with the
hardware products at this point.
Previously, if you had more tried to
set up a sequence for,
say, uncompressed and you wanted
to drop a DV clip into it,
you would need to render that
in order to play it back.
Even if it was possible for you
to decompress it in real time,
we weren't able to get the
data queued properly without a
glitch in between the formats.
In this version,
we're able to do that using a
new filter that we've developed,
which I'll get into later.
So on the floating-point rendering,
this is 128 bits per pixel,
so it's 32 bits per channel.
We're doing this with YUV plus alpha,
and it's what we call the R4FL format.
This is a variation on the
Our 408 format,
which we use internally for our
YUV plus alpha image processing.
Our 408 is 8-bit,
pretty much based on the
standard 601 style of YUV,
but it's a fully sampled 444 format.
And this, with 32 bits per channel,
is using approximately the same layout.
Of course,
videotape machines at this point
don't handle 32 bits per pixel.
They top out at around 10.
So as a more efficient format
for storing that kind of data,
there's the V210 format.
So V210 is storing 10 bits
per channel packed in...
Four pixels and five bytes,
five 32-bit words, something like that.
We've developed a lot of optimized
code for doing the conversion
between our 4FL and V210,
2VUI formats.
And we're making that available
to the developers so that
we get consistent results.
And we thought about leaving it all on
our side and having the interface read
data from either 2VUI or V210 format
and doing the conversion on our side,
where it would be a lot simpler.
But it means that there's one
more buffer copy going on.
If we give you the code to you,
you can put it in your components and
the buffer copy on the decompress can be
doing the translation at the same time.
One of the other advantages of using
QuickTime format in between here is that
Our developers can write drivers
to do any format they want.
You're not restricted to the
V210 or 2VUI formats that we've
developed for uncompressed.
You can come up with a 16-bit
per channel format if you'd like,
or you can come up with other more
highly compressed formats as well.
So here's a block diagram that shows
how we're performing the effects.
Now this is pretty much the
QuickTime model of how you do things.
On the left-hand side,
we've got the video path,
and in the center is the audio path.
So the video goes through
the QuickTime movie,
and then you've got the
codecs that process that and
send it out to the hardware,
and then the hardware
interfaces to the external world
videotape machines or monitors.
The pieces shown in gold are the
parts that you would be writing.
The blue parts are part
of the system software,
and the application in
Final Cut's up there at the top.
The audio path in the
middle is sort of the same.
In the standard QuickTime model,
the audio would be driven
directly off the QuickTime movie.
Within Final Cut,
it's kind of a roundabout path.
In the QuickTime movie,
it's being called driving it all,
but it's going back through
Final Cut to provide the data directly
to Core Audio so that we get the
multi-channel output at this point.
Now, standard real-time effects
that you'll be using,
the first three that I'll talk about
are effects that QuickTime has defined.
So there's composite, alpha gain,
and cross dissolve.
The composite is selected within
the Final Cut interface through
the layering of the tracks.
If you've got more than
one layer of video,
they get combined through
the composite effect.
Alpha gain is really the opacity filter.
So that takes a full 100% opaque
track and adds some opacity to
that so that if you then layer
it on top of something else,
it's blending into the background.
And the cross-dissolve transition
lets you take two clips,
put them next to each other,
and cross-dissolve between them.
So building your effects off
of the standard QuickTime
Codex makes it a lot
simpler to develop these,
and this is really the core set of
being able to do anything in real time.
In addition to those,
we've developed a set within Final Cut.
[Transcript missing]
The Speed Filter lets you define variable
rate speed and play it back in real time.
Now this can be done either
"As a single track where we're
just holding frames and playing
them out in the new durations,
or you can also
"We do a dual track playback
and blend the results.
So in a dual track version,
we provide you the frame that's a
little bit before the point in time
that we really want to be showing,
and the frame that's a little
after that point in time,
and you can blend the two based
on the ratio of how far it is
away from the optimal time."
The RT data filter is something we
developed as a way to get around the
problem I was describing before about
using multiple formats in one sequence.
And this also simplifies the
development of the playback as well.
Because in a standard QuickTime model,
if you're playing normal
video without effects on it,
you're going to get a call per frame
to be decompressing each of the frames.
And then handling it
and passing it through.
When you're performing an effect,
the effect is really treated as
one frame of very long duration.
Or one sample, really.
And you're responsible for
producing all the in-between frames
based on the timing provided.
With this data filter,
you can construct a, well,
Final Cut will construct the sequence
for you so that everything in the movie
is flowing through the effect model.
That if you have no other effects,
you always have the
data filter at the base.
It also provides a way for us
to pass off some data that is
otherwise not easy for you to get.
For example, what's the frame rate?
It's one of those tricky things where
QuickTime's so flexible that they don't
really care what the frame rate is,
but in the video world,
the frame rate really
matters and doesn't change.
Your hardware really
needs to know what it is.
And sometimes it's not as obvious as it
should be when you're trying to figure
it out based on the QuickTime movie.
So we can give you that
directly through this.
The RT-STILS effect lets you include
STILS in the sequence in real time.
Now, the STILS are set up
So that we render them when we
construct the movie and put them
into RAM so that on playback there's
no delay accessing them from disk or
creating them if they're generators.
And the interface provides the
ability to control how much of the
applications memory you're going
to dedicate to the still cache.
And we've got a lot of code in
there to handle releasing and
reallocating the stills as you switch
the sequence that's in the front.
Of course,
if you're using more stills than
fit in memory and you're switching,
it's got to be regenerating
them each time you switch tabs.
So there's a price to that.
And then the motion effect
implements the controls that
are in the Final Cut motion tab.
So this gives you the
ability to do scaling,
centering,
"Rotation, cropping, distort,
drop shadow,
those are the sorts of things
that are in the motion effect."
Now, when we take the effect that you've
described in the Final Cut timeline and
Convert that into a QuickTime movie.
We have to break down the
hierarchy of the effects as
they're going to be processed.
So this is an example where we've got
a moving still over cross-dissolve
of two color-corrected DV sources.
So in the upper left,
we've got the still effect,
which is essentially a generator
in the QuickTime model because
there are no sources to that.
Then below that you can see the
two video streams which feed
the color correction effects.
Those two color correctors go
in the cross dissolve and the
motion still with the motion goes
through being composite on top.
But within the QuickTime movie structure,
it actually looks a lot
more like our timeline,
in that you've got a base video track,
and then you've got tracks
for the various sources.
So over in the movie world,
you're going to see just
the composite there,
and the two DV sources.
So, for example,
the composite that's over
there on the right is the
only thing that you really see
directly in the movie.
And when they try to play back the movie,
QuickTime goes around and asks
all of the installed components
who handle that format,
or that particular effect,
in this case the composite blend effect.
They're looking for anybody
that can handle that,
and if you're writing these components,
your component should say you can.
But when that happens,
you're then responsible for handling
all the things that are below it.
So you need to examine the tree,
make sure that it's all
stuff that you understand,
and then you have to expand that out.
And map that to whatever hardware
or software components you have
that can perform these pieces.
The capture architecture is very
much like the playback architecture,
just a few pieces that are replaced.
Data is flowing the other direction.
You've got the sequence
grabber that's really driving
the QuickTime side of things.
And then the pieces that you need
to write is the video digitizer
and the Core Audio device.
So in the audio side,
it's flowing through the
sound manager and Core Audio.
Again, the audio is the center path
and video is on the left.
And as usual,
the device control is off to the
side as a separate path that really,
in most cases, won't affect anything
that you'd be writing.
The application would talk straight
to the devices through something
like a USB to serial converter.
Or if you're using a FireWire protocol,
it could be A/V sync.
control.
So again,
this is pretty much the standard
QuickTime model for how to do things,
and if you're trying to figure out
how to write the QuickTime drivers,
there's a lot of information
available on the QuickTime website.
And I/O Kit layer for how to
talk to the hardware is also
standard for the device drivers.
But there are some things that
you need to know to work with
Final Cut that are a little different.
One of them is that getting the
AV sync on playback accurately.
For those of you who made it to the
QuickTime session yesterday afternoon,
Jean-Michel was describing the new
APIs that'll make this a little better
in the next version of QuickTime.
Unfortunately, that's not part of
Final Cut 4 at this point,
but we will be switching
to that at some point.
But as it stands now,
since the audio and the video
are running through those two
separate paths that we saw,
they're independent,
and you have to do some work to make
sure that they come back together and
are in perfect sync when you play back.
On the playback side,
it's pretty straightforward
in that as playback begins,
the first frame of audio that you
receive and the first frame of video
that you receive should be lined up,
even though they come at separate times.
We know and you know that those are
the two things that need to be played
together to begin the playback.
For capture,
it's a similar sort of problem,
and that's not yet addressed in
the new version of QuickTime.
So the way we've worked around
that one is to have you insert
a known pattern into the audio,
since the audio is streaming before the
actual video frames start to appear.
You just insert,
we provide a call to give
you the pattern to use.
You insert that into your audio up until
the point where you begin the capture.
And once again, in your drivers,
you know exactly which video frame
you're starting the capture with
and what audio corresponds to that.
So when you get to that first frame of
audio that corresponds to that first
frame of video that you are capturing,
stop inserting our pattern,
put in the real audio stream,
and we'll add that to the video.
After the capture, walk through,
look at the audio at the beginning,
strip off all the parts
that match the pattern,
and line up that,
the next sample of audio,
with the beginning of the video.
As I said,
the VTR control would generally be
through external devices like USB.
Now, one of the other areas that
is different from the standard
QuickTime model is the RT enabler.
This is what's used to let Final Cut know
the capabilities of your RT system.
These are implemented as FX scripts
using the FX script language,
and they're run as startup scripts
as opposed to the normal scripts
that are interpreted and run to
perform effects in real time.
The first important aspect of the
enabler is the effect mapping.
And what the effect mapping accomplishes
for us is the ability to use the same
filters and UI and effect scripts for
real-time as we use for not real-time.
That means that the users don't need
to learn different sets of filters
or choose different filters depending
on their hardware configuration.
They just edit the same
way they always do.
And within this effect mapping,
your script will define which of
our software FX scripts you've got
hardware or other acceleration for.
And through this effect mapping,
we describe what QuickTime components
of yours get called in
place of the FX scripts.
One of the big advantages of that,
as I said, is that you've got only one
set of filters and effects that
people need to learn to use.
But another aspect of that is that
you can take a project file that you
built on a high-end system with lots
of hardware and can move it over to,
say, a PowerBook and work
on a portable system,
which doesn't have
access to your hardware,
and the filters and effects still
perform correctly because they were
all built off of the effects scripts.
We just fall back to the effects scripts.
You can see the right results.
And it works the opposite way, too,
that somebody could be developing
their project in offline mode without
the hardware and then going into
an online suite and using the new
features and capabilities that you've
developed to get things in real time.
Second big aspect of the
RT-Enabler is the effect costing.
The effect costing is necessary to be
able to predict before we play it back
whether something's going to require
rendering or can be played in real time.
At first glance,
that seems like a simple problem,
but in fact,
it's not at all obvious when you get to
the middle ground as to whether something
will perform in real time or not.
If you've got a piece of hardware that's
got three physical decoders on it,
you can pretty well guarantee
that a fourth stream of
video is not going to work.
That's a pretty simple
aspect of the costing.
But if you're doing it in software
or a lot of the hardware these days,
it's more general purpose and
it's more a matter of how many
other things is it trying to do
that limits the capabilities.
So we've got two models that we can use.
One of them is based on a time budget
and the other is a resource budget.
And you can use the two
of them at the same time.
So the resource budget is like the
example I had where you've got physical
decompressors and you can't handle
more than three streams of video.
So you can put a limit
saying you can only do three.
On the other hand,
the time budget is a model
where you describe how long
each of the effects takes.
And how much total time you're willing
to take to perform the effects.
And before we construct
the QuickTime movie,
we run through it,
add it all up and see whether all the
pieces exceeds the limit that you've set.
And if it exceeds the limit,
we'll put up the red render bar saying,
"Sorry, this needs rendering.
We can't do that in
real time." Otherwise,
we'll give you the green render bar
and see it play back in real time.
So a couple of changes that we
made in version 4 to the enablers.
One of these is providing the
manufacturer name to show up
in the Effects Handling tab.
So if you don't add the
new entry to the enabler,
over there where I showed you
in the Effects Handling tab,
we won't know what to provide as a name.
We'll just put the manufacturer 4cc,
which isn't very useful
to your customers.
Another enhancement that we made to it,
if you've looked at
the Final Cut enabler,
the one that's inside of our application,
you can see that it's a pretty big file,
and we've added some commands
that help save the redundancy,
make it easier to write the pieces,
and maintain the code that
you're putting in there.
For example, if you're defining all of
the capabilities for DV,
NTSC DV, you then have to duplicate
all of that again to do PAL,
and with the new commands,
it's pretty easy to just duplicate
and then tell it what's different,
rather than repeat a lot of the data.
Another new thing that we've added in
this version is a debugging enabler,
which
Just use data to counsel about what's
going on while we're interpreting the
effects and figuring out what we're going
to be building in the QuickTime movie.
One of the trickiest things has
been when you build your effect,
you've got all your components installed,
you think everything's set up, and
you put it all together and
you get a red render bar.
It's like, okay, why isn't it real time?
There's a lot of reasons
it could not be real time.
And short of you getting together with
us using your debugger and our debugger,
it's been pretty tricky to
figure out some of these cases.
This way,
we're providing more information
about what we're doing on our side
and what we thought didn't work.
So I think this is going to help a lot.
And we'd like feedback on other
sorts of things that we can be
putting in here that'll help you out.
So, here's an example,
a very simple example,
of what's necessary to enable
video out and the uncompressed
software path in version four.
So, the first line is setting
the enable to view IFX flag,
and that enables the software
processing of uncompressed video in
real time within the application.
The second switch,
the enable software RT video out flag,
lets us call your video out
with our software effect.
So,
This makes the RKE Enabler look simple.
And if you're building
just an I/O device,
this is all you really
need to be able to do.
Because all of the effects processing
will be handled through our software,
we've already got a complex enabler
that describes how to do all
of the effects that we perform.
In this case,
the parameter 1 at the beginning
of the enable software,
or T-video out,
is a description of what the
relative cost of your video audio
is compared to our standard version.
So you need to do a little profiling to
see what scale factor to put in there
so that our costing works out right.
But otherwise,
it's pretty straightforward.
So the opportunities in the
area to support Final Cut,
hardware acceleration is always going
to be able to provide more effects,
better quality.
In the SD world, the SineWave,
for example,
now can do a number of streams of
full-quality SD with a wide variety of
the effects that we have in Final Cut.
In the HD world,
the bandwidth requirements make
hardware a real necessity still.
There's a number of products
already that provide 3/2 pulldown
in real time from the video outs,
so we're playing it back as though
it's 24 and they provide a spicket
that converts that to 30 for playback.
Another aspect of what you
can do with hardware is
provide other kinds of codecs,
so MPEG-2, motion JPEG, there's Bixlet,
who knows?
You can do whatever you want.
So with RTXtreme, that really demands an
I/O style of device.
If you're going to use the software
effects built into Final Cut,
all you need to provide is the
interface to the video hardware.
That can be done either
through PCI or FireWire.
There's a number of boards out there
now that are doing this with PCI.
Gio's going to be talking about how
you can do this with FireWire now.
One of the things that the I/O device
provides is a way to connect to VTRs,
but another aspect is to give
you true color monitoring on
NTSC or PAL video devices.
Another big area of opportunity,
this isn't exactly hardware specific,
but effects scripts and after
effects plugins fit into the effects
model within Final Cut nicely.
So to get back to HD,
this is really the biggest
opportunity area that I see coming up.
And that as RT Extreme gets
faster and faster,
taking over the SD video
world is within sight.
We're not there.
There's still a lot that
hardware can do in that area.
But in HD, it's going to be a while.
There isn't anything that's going
to get you high quality HD out
of the computer as it is today.
Advantage,
it's the same basic architecture as SD,
it's just bigger.
Wider, higher, faster.
And of course, the new hardware that
we've been introducing,
the G5 with PCIX,
will assist you with the high
bandwidth needs in this area.
And the XSERV RAID is a good way to get a
lot of data quickly off of the hard disk.
All right.
I'd like to introduce Giovanni Agnole
to take over and talk about the
uncompressed codecs that we've developed.
Okay,
my name's Giovanni Agnolli and I'm going
to be talking about two things today.
The first is going to be the
uncompressed 422 codecs that we've
included in the Final Cut Pro release.
I'm also going to be talking
about Pro I/O after that.
In the 4.0 release of Final Cut,
we've added standard 8- and 10-bit
uncompressed YCBCR422 codecs,
and these are also
available to developers for
inclusion in their products.
Say you wanted to ship a PCI board
that worked with After Effects.
The main reason we did these codecs
is so that we could facilitate the
exchange of uncompressed data and remove
the need for vendor-specific codecs.
We saw a lot of problems with users
trying to exchange uncompressed data,
and they needed to go and send
their friend who wanted to read
the data the vendor-specific
codec that had created it.
Of course, these codecs are tuned to take
advantage of the latest hardware.
We've done a lot of work to
improve the speed of them by
writing some AlteVec code.
And another big win with these codecs is
that Final Cut 4 supports them natively.
So the formats of these codecs
are pretty straightforward,
and they've been around
for quite a while,
actually.
They were originally
described by Chris Perazzi in
December '99 in QT IceFlow '19,
and I put the link up here
so you guys can check it out.
And we commonly refer to
the codecs by their 4CCs.
So Ken's talked about the
2VUI and the V210 codecs.
That's essentially what
we're talking about here,
8-bit and 10-bit uncompressed YCBCR.
The codecs have a lot of capabilities,
but the things that you guys
are most interested in is what
they compress and decompress to.
And the 2VY codec supports
the R408 and V408 FCP formats,
as well as 32-bit ARGB and 2VY.
The 10-bit adds support for the FCP R4FL,
which is the 32-bit
floating point format,
and V64A, which is the
After Effects 16-bit RGB format.
We also support the QT gamma
level APIs in these codecs.
And so if you have a destination
PIX map that has a different
gamma than the source image,
we'll do the gamma conversion for you.
And as I said before,
they've been optimized
for the latest hardware.
So the main reason we're telling
you about this is because we
want you to use these codecs.
And just, you know,
the benefits are highest quality.
It's uncompressed.
It's not a lossy codec.
We want to get a common file format
among our user base so that we can ease
the interchange of data among our users,
which we believe will improve
the user workflow dramatically.
And it's also important that
you support these formats if
you intend to use RTX Stream,
because RTX Stream is
tuned for these codecs.
We use the 2VUI format
internally to render.
So if it has to do a
conversion to another format,
that's an extra copy there
that means loss of performance.
And best of all,
you're getting free optimized code.
And it can't get better than that.
We're going to give these codecs
to you to distribute if you'd like.
And that means less work
for you as a developer.
You can focus on doing something
cool with your hardware
instead of writing codecs.
So the next thing I'm going
to talk about is ProIO,
which is, I don't know,
a new way of getting audio and
video in and out of the Macintosh.
And first I want to talk a little
bit about the philosophy behind
ProIO and why we went about doing this.
As Ken talked previously,
we see this trend of ever increasing
processing power in the CPU and
GPU and decreasing cost of storage.
And so that led us to
developing RTX Stream,
which takes advantage of those
capabilities in the host machine.
And with that,
we needed a mechanism for easily getting
audio and video in and out of the Mac,
primarily interfacing with
professional devices such as
high-end VTRs and cameras.
And so when we went and tried
to figure out what kind of
bus we were going to use,
we decided on FireWire because of
its easy plug and play capabilities.
And it's also really simple
instead of like having to
go to a PCI card or whatnot,
you just plug it in
similar to a DV camera.
So what is a Pro-I architecture?
It's basically got two parts.
We have a data transfer
protocol specification,
and we also have FireWire
unit specifications.
And the data transfer protocol
specification mainly deals with
how to send uncompressed audio
and video over the 1394A bus.
And so in that uncompressed stream,
we're sending synchronized
audio and video.
The video can be NTC or PAL, 8 or 10 bit,
YCBC or 422 video.
And we also send eight
channels of uncompressed audio,
which can be 16 or 24 bit,
and a variety of sample rates.
And that all comes out to
about 230 megabits per second.
And then once we add, like, pro-I,
we can send that to the Pro-I.
And so in that uncompressed stream,
we're sending synchronized
audio and video.
The video can be NTC or PAL, 8 or 10 bit,
YCBC or 422 video.
And we also send eight
channels of uncompressed audio,
which can be 16 or 24 bit,
and a variety of sample rates.
protocol and packetization on
top of that were really pushing
the limits of the 1394a spec.
But we believe that it was important
to fit all this into the 400 megabit
per second spec versus just because of
the wide variety of machines out there
that have these connections on them.
So getting back to the protocol
specification also covers things like
packetization and the framing of the
data and some flow control techniques.
The second part of the architecture
is the FireWire unit specification.
And I don't know if you know
anything about FireWire,
but there's a lot of
resources on the web.
A unit specification kind of allows
a device to define its capabilities.
And so we have three units.
There's the AV unit,
which is the -- it does
most of the heavy lifting.
It handles all the transfer of
uncompressed audio and video.
And we have a serial unit,
which handles -- allows us to
transmit RS-422 over the FireWire.
So this is really
useful for deck control.
And the third unit we've
put into the architecture is
the firmware upgrade unit,
which allows you to upgrade
your device at some later date.
So if you want to upgrade the firmware,
it's -- there's a unit
that allows you to do that.
So, what are the developer
opportunities with Pro I/O?
Well, what we're trying to get is people,
you developers,
to develop Pro I/O devices.
We really think that there's a broad
market for these things and it really,
you know, we've had a lot of success
with the first devices to date.
So, you can develop an
analog-only device that would,
you know,
convert component or composite signals,
you know, XLR into digital data and
send it over the FireWire bus.
Or you could develop a digital
I/O device that would take in SDI,
AES, ADAT, et cetera.
Or you could do a device that did both.
Or maybe you have an idea.
Maybe you have an idea of some
other connection that we haven't
thought of and we'd be happy
to talk to you about that and,
you know, update the specifications
to include that.
So the first Pro IO device that
is out there today is the AJIO.
And it's kind of the Cadillac of devices.
And I just put this up here as an example
to show you what these devices look like.
Basically, we have a bunch of analog
and digital connections.
Pretty much anything a professional
video user could want to connect
to their existing VTRs or cameras.
And then you'll see in the lower
middle part of the screen there,
there's a FireWire connection.
That's the bus connection to the Mac.
So we're basically capturing
data or playing back data through
all these different connections
and then transferring it over
the FireWire bus to the Mac.
There's also an RS-422 connection
there for deck control,
which if you're in the Pro video space,
you know is absolutely necessary.
Amen.
So, along with the architecture,
we're also providing drivers.
The ProIO driver release is a
standard set of QuickTime drivers
for ProIO devices.
So,
if you make a device that follows a spec,
it should work with these drivers.
In that set of QuickTime drivers,
there's a VDIG and a HAL plugin
for capture of audio and video,
and also VOUT and the
VOUT transfer codec and Clock,
Core Audio,
HAL plugin output device for playback.
And it's basically the QuickTime driver
set that you need to interrupt with
any QuickTime-capable application.
So,
if you make a device that follows a spec,
it should work with these drivers.
So, the idea is that these drivers
should work not just with Final Cut,
but with other applications as well.
Additionally,
we support the Final Cut specific
APIs that Ken talked about earlier,
the Cover, A/V sync, and a Deck Control.
And those are, you know,
we're the Final Cut team,
so of course we do the extra
bit to support our app.
In addition,
there's Apple FireWire Serial Driver,
which... allows you to send
serial data over the FireWire
bus to the ProIO device.
And, of course,
all this stuff's been optimized
for the latest hardware,
lots of good AlteVec loops, etc.
And best of all,
it's out there right now.
It was released yesterday.
I took Ken's capture architecture
diagram and kind of grayed out all the
non-ProIO parts just to show you what
we're providing in the driver package and
also what you as a developer need to do.
If you look down there,
there's the ProIO hardware.
That's what developers need to develop.
And then you can look and see that we
provide a ProIO VDIG and ProIO HAL plugin
to get audio and video into Final Cut or
any QuickTime-enabled application.
And then we also have the Apple FireWire
serial driver to do deck control.
And all those talk through
the I/O FireWire family,
which sends queries
across the FireWire bus.
So playback is very similar.
We have a transfer codec,
a V-out clock to send video out,
and we have a HAL plugin
to send audio out.
And again,
they communicate through the I/O FireWire
family to the Pro I/O hardware.
And there's the Apple FireWire serial
driver there for any deck control.
So obviously I can't tell you
how to build a device right here.
So if you want more information
on uncompressed 422 codec
licensing or ProIO licensing,
or want to take part in
an upcoming ProIO kitchen,
you should contact Jeff Lowe,
who's our WDR representative,
and he will help get you
the right information.
I think I'm going to call Brett up.
He's going to wrap up for us.
Thanks, Jill.
So we spent some time going over
all the various ways that you can
be approaching or get involved in
developing hardware for Final Cut 4.
We strongly encourage you to do that.
There's a number of other sessions
that you can get involved with.
Some of them are coming up here or
have happened early in the week,
and if you've missed them,
they should be on the DVD.
We will have a session tomorrow
for dealing with plug-ins and
encourage you to do that if
you're interested in creating,
for example, effects scripts or things
like After Effects modules,
things like that.
We will be talking about the
various plug-in models there,
and we will have a feedback form for
Final Cut on Friday afternoon at 5:00.
As already mentioned,
Jeff Lowe is the guy.
If you're interested in any of the
pro professional film and video area,
he can help you.
As mentioned,
we will be having a kitchen later
this year to get into details about
actually how to make some of these
devices and what the protocols,
wire protocols and stuff are.
There's a number of places
you can get more information.
And obviously, it can take a while to
scribble all this down,
but I believe all this information
is up on the web for you.
But in addition to the kind
of standard stuff that's out
there in terms of video formats,
if you haven't had a chance,
there's QuickTime sessions and
audio sessions and I/O Kit sessions
that will be very important for
you in terms of driver development.